## LCDM model/CDM/WIMPs (3)
The Λ cold dark matter (ΛCDM) model is currently considered the standard model of cosmology. According to this model, ∼ 95% of the universe is unaccounted for. The energy content of our universe at the current epoch is dominated (∼ 72%) by a cosmological constant, Λ, the nature of which is still a matter of discussion. Moreover, ∼ 23% of the energy density is in the form of dark matter which is made of “cold”, “dark”, and non-baryonic particles. These particles are called “dark”, since they are only detectable through gravitational interactions and interact very weakly with photons and other standard-model particles. “Cold” refers to the fact that the velocities of dark matter particles were non-relativistic at the epoch of decoupling; and they are intrinsically different from the normal (baryonic) matter. The CDM model explains the anisotropies in cosmic microwave background (CMB) as observed by the Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe (WMAP) in a more convincing way than the alternative forms of DM such as warm or hot DM (Spergel et al., 2007; Komatsu et al., 2009, 2011). Besides, the large-scale structure formation of the universe based upon the ΛCDM model is in agreement with most observational data. The subgalactic-scale predictions of the model, however, have not yet been confirmed observationally. 

### Missing satellite problem (3)
The count of satellite galaxies in the local Universe vastly differs from that of subhalos predicted by CDM simulations. Based on the standard structure formation recipe, the smooth component of massive halos are built up from tidal stripping material from smaller ones. However, as this process occurs over several billion years, many small halos are expected to temporarily survive in the form of subhalos which make up $\sim 10\%$ of the mass of a galaxy-sized halo at z=0 \citep[][]{Gao11, Maciejewski11}. On the other hand, dwarf galaxies are expected to form in low-mass field halos, which would result in a large expected number of satellite galaxies within the dark matter halo of the central galaxy. It is commonly argued that this discrepancy could be explained by including feedback processes suppressing star formation in low-mass halos \citep[][]{Maccio10, Font11} meaning that a large population of substructures with very high mass-to-light ratios in the halos of galaxies has remained undiscovered.

### Too big to fail problem (3)
One naively expects to find the most luminous dwarf galaxies in the most massive subhalos and high-resolution cosmological simulations persistently produce massive subhalos ($M_{vir} \geq 10^{10} M_\odot$) which are too concentrated in their central kpc to host any of the satellite galaxies around the Milky Way or Andromeda \citep[][]{Boylan-Kolchin11}. Some models suggest that these satellilee galaxies correspond to more massive subhalos at higher redshifts. Therefore, the discovery of very massive substructures in the halos of galaxies at higher redshifts could help resolving this concern.

### Cusp/core problem (3)
Standard halos of the CDM model are too concentrated in the center compared to the observed halo parameters of dwarf galaxies. While N-body simulations based upon the CDM theory predict a cuspy dark matter distribution of dark halos with a high central concentration, observations of the rotation curves of galaxies have failed to confirm this in their central regions.

### Plane-of-satellites problem (1)

### Separate issues or fundamental challenge? (2)

## Gravitational lensing (5)
The fact that gravity treats dark and luminous mass the same gives gravitational lensing a unique opportunity to provide an independent test for the presence of halo substructures. Strong lensing by a foreground object can produce multiple images of a background lightsource. Measurements on strong lensing systems provide us with information about mass distribution of both the lens and the source. All different types of massive objects such as galaxies or galaxy clusters can serve as lenses and bend the light from their background. However, in order to study the sub-galactic structure of dark matter we need to look at a particular type of lensing systems which involve a single lens galaxy only. The foreground galaxy produces multiple images of the background light source, which are $\sim1$ arcsec apart. One way to use such systems to probe dark matter on sub-galactic scales is to study the small-scale distortions that halo substructure is expected to introduce in the surface brightness distributions of extended macroimages. 

### Strong lensing/compound lensing
Dark halo substructure inside the halo of a foreground galaxy may reveal itself as secondary, small-scale gravitational lensign effects on light sources that are multiply-lensed by the galaxy. 

### Flux-ratio anomaly/Time delay-Astrometric shift/Surface-brightness disturbance/
__Flux ratio anomalies__ Gravitational lensing is a propagation phenomenon, thus it _in principle_  conserves the number of photons. On the other hand, the gravitational deflection influences the cross section of the light bundle differentially. Consequently, in order to conserve the flux, the area of the image(s) of the source changes. This leads to different magnifications for different macroimages. However, mere determination of the flux of a single image does not provide any information if the intrinsic flux of the source is unknown. The observable quantities, are rather the flux ratio and positions of two separate macroimages of a single source.
While simple, smooth models of galaxy lenses are usually able to reproduce the positions of macroimages (about 1 arcsec apart by definition), their flux ratios are more difficult to explain/reproduce. Such flux ratio violations have been interpreted as evidence of substructure lensing by subhalos within the halo of the main lens. However, this interpretation of flux ratio anomalies being purely due to substructure lensing leads to far too many substructures compared to that expected from CDM simulations. On the other hand, flux ratio anomalies are made by low-mass secondary lenses. Assuming the substructure population predicted by N-body simulations being valid, this discrepancy either comes from secondary lenses along the line of sight at redshifts different from the main lens, or point to the presence of other forms of low-mass dark (or luminous) lenses than low-mass CDM subhalos (we investigate IMBHs and UCMHs in this context in Paper I)

__Time delay__ Each image of a macrolensed source follows a different path to reach the observer, i.e. is subject to a different time delay. This time delay consists of two independent components; the geometrical and the gravitational component. The geometrical component springs from the fact that the path lengths are different for each image. The gravitational component, also known as the Shapiro effect, stems from the relativistic effect of retardation in strong gravitational fields. However, different time delays of various images cannot be observed if the source is not instrinsically variable, since this effect is manifested in the phase difference of the light curves of various images. When it comes ti subhalio hunting, the perturbation to the time delats between macroimages predicted by a smooth lens model serves as an evidence for the presence of substructures within the main lens. As Moustakas+2009 argues, such an effect is only sensitive to subhalos at the high-mass end of the mass function.

__Astrometric shift__ The proximity of the projected image of a foreground massive object to a background source has a couple of effects. Among many, one is a change in the apparent position of the source. This effect which is usually accompanied by magnification or distortion effects is called the astrometric effect. Astrometric effects are therefore detectable mostly in dynamic cases, such as microlensing cases, where the observer can actually follow the differences in the relative positions in the system. One of these cases stems from the presence of substructures in the main lens such that where the deflector consists of a parent halo with a distribution of subhalos inside. When it comes to the astrometric perturbation due to the substructure inside a subhalos, the image gets shifted from the original position of the macroimage, under the influence of a subhalo. Such effect is mostly sensitive to intermediate and high mass substructures Moustakas et al.(2009) and in clearly visible in the results of Paper I. However, we are not interested in GL effects of this kind in our simulations.

__Surface brightness perturbations:__ 

Another approach to detecting substructure lensing is small-scale morphology distortions of one of the macroimages of the same light source. Thses surface brightness distortions can be distinguished from the internal source morphology by the characteristic that they are present themselves in one macroimage while source morphology is replicated in all lensed images of the sour. The lensing effects produced by halo substructures can be separated from intrinsic morphological features in jets, since the latter would be reproduced in all macroimages whereas dark matter clumps in the halo of the lens would affect each macroimage differently. Effects of this type tend to be sensitive to the inner density profile (central mass concentration) of the lens substructure. This is the main question we are addressing in Paper II.

## Radio interferometry (5)
A radio interferometer is an array of radio antennas or ‘elements’ that are used in astronomical observations simultaneously to simulate a discretely-sampled single telescope of very large aperture. To put it another way, a radio interferometer can be thought of as a single telescope with a very large and incompletely-filled aperture, of maximum size equivalent to the maximum spacing, or baseline, between any two of its component elements. This large ‘synthesized’ aperture is only sampled at the locations at which an element exists, and this is aided by the rotation of the Earth which effectively moves the elements within it, hence increasing the sampling. This is known as ‘Earth rotation aperture synthesis’. The size of the synthesized aperture dictates the resolution or ‘beam size’ of the array; the larger the aperture, the smaller the resolution.

__2element figure__

The basic interferometer is a pair of radio telescopes whose voltage outputs are correlated (multiplied and averaged). Even the most elaborate interferometers with N2 elements can be treated as N(N−1)2 independent interferometer pairs. 

The figure shows two identical dishes separated by a baseline vector of length b.  Both dishes are pointing in the direction specified by s.  Plane waves from a distant point source in this direction must travel an extra distance b.s=bcos(theta) to reach antenna 1, so the output of antenna 1 is the same as that of antenna 2, but it lags by the geometric delay. The correlator first multiplies these two voltages to yield the product and then takes a time average long enough (depending on observing frequency) to remove the high-frequency term from the final output R. 
  -The amplitudes V1 and V2 are proportional to the electric field produced by the source multiplied by the the voltage gains of antennas 1 and 2.  Thus the output amplitude V22 is proportional to the point-source flux density S multiplied by (A1*A2)^1/2, where A1 and A2 are the effective collecting areas of the two antennas. 
  -The correlator output voltage R=(V2^2)cos(g) varies sinusoidally with the change of source direction in the interferometer frame.  These sinusoids are called fringes.The fringe period corresponds to an angular change LAMBDA/(bsin(theta)). The fringe phase is an exquisitely sensitive measure of source position if the projected baseline bsin is many wavelengths long.

### Maximum baseline

### Weighting
Aperture synthesis is the technique of reconstructing an image from incomplete sampling of the Fourier space. The technique is based on modeling the visibility plane based on the existing samplings. Therefore, the more complete the (u, v) coverage the closer the model image to the real one seen by the array. However, there will always be holes in the sampled (u, v) plane limiting the fidelity and quality (i.e. $\text{dynamic range} = \frac{\text{peak}}{\text{RMS}}$ of the reconstructed image.) Fourier transform of the (u, v) coverage gives the so-called _dirty beam_ (equivalent to the point spread function PSF) while the Fourier transform of the measured visibilities on the (u, v) plane results in the ``dirty image'' of the source, which is, as expected, the actual source structure convolved with the dirty beam. Now that we have images of both the beam and the source, we can deconvolve the beam from the image. Remember that deconvolution is non-linear and non-unique! (See \S \ref{sec:CLEAN} to read about the CLEAN algorithm.) In aperture synthesis, modeling is applied while working in the image plane. The process is such that the dirty beam and dirty image are calculated based on the (u, v) coverage and direct visibility measurements, respectively. For this purpose, the (u, v) plane is required to be gridded.

__Natural weighting__ as it sounds is simply weighting visibilities inversely proportional to the variance of their distribution. Therefore, short--spacings in the (u, v) plane, with closer samplings, are weighted more than longer baselines which results in higher dynamic range in the modeled image at the cost of angular resolution. In other words, the dirty beam has larger FWHM but less prominent side lobes (compared to the rms noise). Therefore, it is best for imaging faint and smooth sources. __natural weighting actually increases sidelobe levels, but what it does is reduce the image rms noise.__                      
__Uniform weighting__ is the same as natural weighting with an additional factor inversely proportional to the number of visibilities in each pixel. Therefore, it boosts the contribution from long--spacings by giving the same weight to visibilities at all (u, v) distances, even though those at long distances are sampled more coarsely. This property makes this approach more suitable for sources with rich and complicated structure. Although, the source needs to be bright enough for this approach to work best. This is because this weighting scheme results in a narrow(er than naturally--weighted) PSF with smaller side lobes and therefore, better angular resolution. However, the RMS of the residuals of this model tends are large(r than that of natural by at least an order of $\sim 2$), i.e. poorer sensitivity.

__Briggs weighting__ is a tunable combination of both approaches above. The tunability of Briggs' recipe is applied through the \emph{robust} parameter. This parameter changes in the range of -2 to +2 from uniform to natural weighting. Usually, robust=0.5 gives a good compromise between the two extreme approaches. Although it still depends on the preferences based on the scientific target.

## Paper I (10)
We explored the propsects of using VLBI observations of multiply-lensed quasar jets to detect submilliarcsecond-scale image distortions produced by various forms of halo substructure in the mass range between 10^3 - 10^8 Msun. We ran a series of simulations which examine the detectability of three different dark halo substructures with different VLBI observational modes; The European VLBI network EVN at 22 GHz providing an angular resolution of ~0.3 mas, the global VLBI array at 8.4 GHz resulting in an angular resolution of 0.7 mas, and an upcoming addition of phased ALMA to the global mm VLBI array with an extraordinary resolution of 0.0 5mas at 86 GHz (3mm).

__IMBH__ with mass in 10^3 to 10^6 Msun may either form primordially, when the Universe is << 1s old, or due to baryonic collapse at later times. The non-primordial IMBH may be found as the result of the collapse of very massive pop III stars of globular clusters. The latter of which implies that these blackholes are now either hidden in globular clusters, or could be found in satellite galaxies or free-floating inside galactic halos. hOwever, since only a small fraction of the cosmic baryons can be locked up in these non-primordial IMBHs, their relative contributions to the halo masses of galaxies are typically expected to be small (f IMBH < 10^-5.). When simulating the potential millilensing effects of IMBHs, we treat the surface mass density fraction f IMBH in IMBHs at the position of the macroimages as a free parameter, and for simplicity assume all IMBHs to have the same mass. 
In principle, primordial black holes may over time accrete substantial amounts of dark matter and develop dark matter halos of their own (Mack et al. 2007), similar to the ultracompact minihalos, IMBHs forming through the collapse of pop III stars in minihalos may also be surrounded by their own, highly contracted dark matter halos. Such compound objects are expected to have lensing properties intermediate between IMBHs and ultracompact minihalos, but are not treated in detail in our simulations

__UCMH__ Primordial density perturbations with delta>10^-3 are orders of magnitude too small to form blackholes but they can seed UCMHs. Such perturbations might be produced during phase transitions, around topological defects, or in the primordial spectrum of perturbations from inflation. The dark matter contained in these perturbations would collapse into UCMHs shortly after matter-radiation equality, via radial infall from a universally cold, smooth cosmological background. This radial collapse would leave UCMHs with much steeper central density profiles than standard CDM halos. Because dark matter self-
annihilation would reduce the central density of UCMHs, UCMHs made out of self-annihilating WIMPs would not be efficient millilense.
If dark matter exists in the form of self-annihilating (or decaying) WIMPs, UCMHs would begamma-ray emitters, within detection capabilities of Fermi LAT source identifications. There are no reports of such detections so far. If DM doe not annihilate or decay, however, UCMHs may still be detectable via gravitational lensing.

In UCMHs, Radial infall leads to a density profile ρ∝r^−2.25, slightly steeper than the ρ∝r^−2 profile of a singular isothermal sphere (often used to model lensing by the inner regions of large galaxies.

__Lensing simulations:__

  - A small region around each such macroimage is then populated with randomly distributed dark halo substructures and simulated in greater detail. 
  - The deflection angles (with contributions both from substructures and the macrolens) are computed for every pixel within this region and converted into a numerical surface brightness map of the macroimage. 
  - Both the resolution and the intrinsic source dimensions are determined by the frequency at which we assume the jets to be observed. Macrolens at z=0.5 with line-of-sight velocity dispersion = 240 km/s corresponding to a virial mass of ~10^13 Msun.
  - The two macroimages are ~2" apart. The simulations presented in this paper are all based on a lens-source configuration that in the absence of substructure would give magnifications μ1≈10 and μ2≈8 for the two macroimages.
  - Around 30 simulated lensing maps of this type are generated for each combination of M-IMBH and f-IMBH, or M-UCMH and f-UCMH, with randomized substructure positions for each realization, in the derivation of the detection probabilities

__Assumptions:__ 

  - the surface mass density across the macroimage is completely dominated by dark matter
  - number densities of IMBH and UCMHs trace DM denisty. The surface number density of such subtructures then simply depends on their relative contribution to dark matter fsub=Ωsub/ΩCDM and their mass distribution. Since detailed predictions for the mass distribution of IMBHs and UCMHs are highly model-dependent, we assume all such objects to have the same mass.
  - CDM subhalos are assumed to have the simulated or the observed form. According to simulations fNFW = 0.002 at the typical position of macroimages, with logarithmic mass function slope of -1.9. The observed values (of the time), however, hint at a flatter mass function (slope = -1.1) and a mass fraction of fNFW~0.03.
  - Source is a straight jet with single Gaussian surface brigthness profile with FWHM length of 40, 10, and 2 pc at 8.4, 22, anf 86 GHz respectively (jet length calculated from the MOJAVE (__M__onitoring __O__f __J__ets in __A__ctive galactic nuclei with VLBA __E__xperiments) sample)
  
__Results:__

  - At fixed angular resolution, a larger jet results in a stronger constraint whereas a smaller jet makes the constraints weaker.
  - In all figures shown: Simulated surface brightness maps and isoflux contour plots, where the outermost contours correspond to ≈10% of the peak flux in these images.
  
Our results show that to detect lensing signatures made by standard dark halo substructures with current and foreseeing VLBI observational modes, we need to focus on large sources, such as radio-loud quasars which are manifested as ∼100-pc sized jets in certain frequency bands. However, if, as some astronomers propose, some fraction of the dark matter is in the form of intermediate-mass black holes with masses ranging from ∼ 10^3 Msun ∼ 10^6 Msun, these observations should be able to confirm it.

Using simulations of strongly lensed quasar jets, we argue that very dense forms of halo substructure (intermediate-mass blackholes and ultracompact minihalos) within the main lens may reveal itself through small-scale morphological distortions in the macroimages. Such distortions can be distinguished from intrinsic source features by obtaining data at multiple epochs. By mapping a handful of macrolensed jet systems at submilliarcsecond resolution, we argue that 10^3–10^6 M-sun intermediate-mass black holes can be detected or ruled out if they contribute a surface mass fraction of f-IMBH & 0.01 (depending on the VLBI array and frequency used) to the dark matter of the main lens at the macroimage positions. Ultracompact minihalos in the 10^6 –10^8 M-sun mass range may similarily produce detectable small-scale effects if such objects comprise f-UCMH > 0.1 of the dark matter. While standard CDM subhalos at masses of >10^8 M-sun can in principle also produce milliarcsecond-scale distortions, provided that such objects are projected sufficiently close to the macroimages, the probability of this is too small (P-milli∼10^-4) for sources of the type we consider.

__Discussion:__

## Paper II (10)
The results of Paper I shows that while quasar jets are suitable sources for probing the compact (non-standard) forms of dark matter substructure, more extended sources (~ 10^3 times in area) are needed to study the small-scale lensing perturbations due to the presence of -far less concentrated- standard CDM subhalos. Therefore, the next best target is the dust emission from lensed star-forming galaxies, meaning mm/sub-mm wavelengths. Currently, the highest-resolution observations at this high frequency range can only be done with ALMA. The paper I have been working on focuses on sub-mm galaxies (SMGs) at z ~ 2 which are strongly lensed by a single galaxy at z ~ 0.5. I study the local and overall visibility distortions different images of a same system to derive the mass and density profile of the perturber in the lens and how the degeneracy between the two parameters can change the mass fraction and mass function of dark subhalos from a sample of detections of this kind.

__Comparison between Paper II and Paper I in targeted lens systems and method:__

  - more extended sources at mm wavelength (SMG instead of radio jets)
  - emphasis on CDM substructure rather than other forms of dark subhalos
  - modeling simulated data on the (u,v) plane rather than the image plane (as we did in Paper I) which is the suitable approach for RI data/simulations due to errors being uncorrelated on the (u,v) plane
  - we are not after probing the mass function of surface DM mass density in subhalos, rather focus on single subhalo detection limits and the degeneracy between the subhalo parameters (mass, density slope, position), and those of the main lens
  - in Paper II we combine the two effects of secondary lensing into multiple images into account, i.e. the local surface brightness perturbation (as investigated in Paper I) in combination with the astrometric shift due to the presence of the secondary lens in the system changing the solution of the main lens.

__Halo substructure/CDM density profiles:__

- According to observational data: the single–parameter (cored) singular isothermal sphere (ellipsoid) profile provides an acceptable lens model for the __mean__ dark matter halo of galaxies.
    * Singular Isothermal Ellipsoid (Sphere): Largely-used for modeling galaxies and clusters of galaxies act as gravitational lenses because of the simplicity, symmetry and enough accuracy in multiple image positioning in provides.
    * [pseudo-]Jaffe profile: generalization of the light profile of elliptical galaxies. It reproduces the projection of the 3D de Vaucouleurs profile on the sky. This also makes it popular in especially gravitational lensing modeling of dark matter halos where what is directly measured is the surface mass density and thoughtful deprojection is required to match the lens mass [profile] derived from lens modeling to that of simulated halos in N-body simulations.

- According to N-body simulations: the __universal__ density profiles of field halos in CDM simulations can be reasonably well described by the NFW profile where mass density decreases as r^-3 close to the center and r^-1 in outer regions. One more flexible (3-parameter profile) is the _Einasto_  profiles that is a 3-D generalization of the Sersic pforile for the surface brightness profile of elleptical galaxies.
    * NFW density diverges centrally
    * Einasto gives a finite (zero) central slope
    * Einasto index parameterize the shape parameter (or how curved the density profile is)
    * N-body simulations cannot resolve the two in central regions of DM halos
    * Another way to relax the third parameter is the generalized NFW profile

__Lensing simulations:__

  * __source__: We model the dust continuum emission with a single Gaussian component with FWHM ≃ 0.5 − 1.0 arcsec and an unlensed flux density of 5 mJy at z = 2.0.
  * __main lens__:The main lens is assumed to be a singular isothermal sphere the same as that in Paper I (line-of-sight velocity dispersion ~ 240 km/s). Simulations presented in this paper are all based on a lens–source configuration that in the absence of substructure would give typical magnifications μ 1 ≈ 10 for at least one of the macroimages. This is consistent with typical magnification for observed SMGs. Different lens-source alignments that satisfy this criterion has been chosen to work with

__Results__:

The contour lines on all subframes show the main lens model (without substructure) down to 10% of the maximum flux density and the color map on each frame indicates the effect of a substructure (with different inner density profile in the different subframes) on the surface brightness distribution of the lensed source. The following rows are CASA simulations imaged
using natural and uniform weighting, respectively. By comparing the corresponding subfigures in each set one can spot the differences in lensing residuals due to various weighting schemes. One relevant feature seen already in the lensing models is the clear presence of a small–scale perturbation at the position of the substructure when the substructure is in the form of compact halos. On the other hand, the Einasto (α Ein = 0.05) substructure shows the most significant large–scale perturbation among all other substructures, both in the lensing model and in the normal ly–weighted images, but much less significantly on the images made using uniform weighting scheme. While most of the effects are concentrated around peaks of the marcoimage, in stronger cases, the large scale differences are present at detectable levels. In case of compact lens perturbers, SIS and pseudo–Jaffe, clearly detectable small–scale effects are also present (strong blue spots on the upper right macroimage). In principle, this small–scale effect is present in all lensing case, but remains below the resolution limit for others.
